The paper would attempt to look at the coverage
of Nigeria's ethnic diversity and conflicts in
Alaroye publications. By Alaroye publications,
we refer to the news publications emanating from
World Information Agents. They include Alaroye
newspaper, Alaroye Magazine and Akede
Agbaye. Since the colonial days, the various
ethnic groups that make up the nation, Nigeria,
have been dealing with t; themselves with mutual
suspicion and unhealthy rival. The quest for
power and the exclusion from power have been
major dynamite in the political troubles that
have confronted the country. In diverse ways,
the Nigerian press have been mirroring this. In
other words, happenings in the society have
impacted on the content and nature of the press;
while, the press, in turn, as an agent of
socialisation, have affected the society
fulfilling, in this sense, its function as a
tool in shaping news and opinions.

The ethnic identity of a Nigerian newspaper is
determined by the ethnic identity of the
publisher and the main market that the paper
seeks to cultivate and patronise. Indigenous
language newspapers are ethnic based newspapers
which, of course, have primordial interests in
the ethnic groups whose (indigenous) languages
the news papers use. These newspapers can lead
and modify the opinions of their peoples forming
stereotypes for them about other ethnic groups;
thereby fuelling further the social conflicts.
